TITLE: Mitigating Limited Data Challenges to Improve Artificial Intelligence Integration in Rare Disease Drug Development
AUTHORS: Atasi Poddar, Gabriel K. Innes, Qi Liu, Anindita Saha, Morgan Hanger, Kelly Franzetti, M. Khair ElZarrad, Tala H. Fakhouri

ABSTRACT:
The Orphan Drug Act defines a rare disease as a condition affecting fewer than 200,000 people in the United States. However, most rare diseases are categorized as ultrarare or hyper-rare, impacting fewer than 100 individuals worldwide. Developing drugs for these conditions involves multiple challenges, such as geographically dispersed and small patient populations, limited natural history data, and poor disease characterization. Issues related to small patient numbers, scarce natural history information, and clinical heterogeneity within rare diseases can be addressed by various strategies, including using artificial intelligence and advanced analytical methods, leveraging detailed individual-level data, and exploring synthetic data generation to overcome the limitations of small datasets. Moreover, establishing centralized databases and promoting public–private partnerships can help build a more comprehensive repository of available data.

BODY:
IntroductionThe Orphan Drug Act defines a rare disease as a condition that affects fewer than 200,000 people in the United States.1 However, most rare diseases fall into the ultrarare and hyper-rare categories, impacting fewer than 100 individuals globally.2,3 Drug development programs for these conditions are hindered by several factors, including geographically dispersed and small patient populations, limited natural history data, and poor disease characterization.4 Clinical heterogeneity — both in manifestation and prognosis — even within a single condition, further complicates research and trial design considerations. Collectively, an estimated 30 million Americans, or roughly 9% of the U.S. population, are affected by 1 of approximately 7000 identified rare diseases.5 Despite this burden, fewer than 5% of rare diseases have a therapy labeled by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).6 Although regulatory incentives have catalyzed progress, limited commercial viability continues to constrain innovation, contributing to a substantial and persistent unmet medical need.7Through advancements and innovations in computational approaches and methods, artificial intelligence (AI) technologies can address challenges related to small patient populations, data scarcity, and clinical variability. For example, AI methods can be used for: natural history modeling and disease characterization; small-sample inference and transfer learning; synthetic data generation; identification of novel therapeutic targets; de novo drug design; identification of drug repurposing candidates; accelerated biomarker discovery; and personalized medicine.8 AI may also be used to optimize clinical trial design and operations, increasing efficiency and reducing trial costs. Collectively, these AI applications offer a scalable path forward by addressing a key challenge inherent to the development of drugs for rare diseases: small patient populations.In August 2024, the FDA and the Clinical Trials Transformation Initiative (CTTI) hosted a workshop titled ‘Artificial Intelligence in Drug and Biological Product Development’ aimed at exploring responsible AI applications in drug development through expert discussions on guiding principles, evaluation methods, challenges, scalability, and future considerations. An accompanying Policy Corner article in this issue of NEJM AI summarizes the workshop discussions and highlights key insights.9 In this Perspective article, we focus on the discussions regarding data scarcity in rare diseases, how this scarcity hampers the application of AI technologies in rare disease drug development, and potential strategies to incorporate AI tools to address the limitations of limited data.Patient Population as a Key ChallengeData scarcity related to rare disease patient populations is due to the fact that these populations are, by definition, small. Often, historical datasets are limited and inaccessible, which is problematic for training fit-for-use AI models (i.e., models developed for the specific intended purpose and context), which require large datasets. This is further complicated by heterogeneity in clinical presentation and prognosis, which reduces the likelihood of capturing a representative population in limited datasets. Furthermore, validating AI models for rare diseases is often challenging due to an insufficient number of patients.Opportunities and StrategiesMany of the general strategies to accelerate the integration of AI technology into drug development9 are applicable to therapeutics intended to manage and treat rare diseases. Owing to the complexities in the rare disease landscape, innovative approaches to data collection and analysis, collaborative efforts across sectors, and supportive regulatory frameworks will be essential (Fig. 1).AI model training often requires large sample sizes. Subsequent validity testing of those AI models also typically requires substantial amounts of data.10 Recent advancements in analytical methods for small datasets have increased statistical power, thereby requiring smaller sample sizes compared with traditional methods.11 In addition, there are ongoing efforts to train AI models with small sample sizes without compromising on accuracy and avoiding overfitting. These methods would be useful for effectively leveraging the smaller datasets in rare disease areas.Although rare diseases may have small patient populations, the depth of data available for each patient is valuable. The availability of information, including longitudinal records, multiomics data, imaging, and behavioral data, could contribute to the collection of extensive patient-level data from individuals affected by rare diseases. This depth of data allows researchers to understand both the common and unique characteristics of diseases, including diseases with clinical heterogeneity. AI techniques can potentially extract more insights from rich individual-level data to learn complex patterns more effectively, even with limited samples.Synthetic data (sometimes referred to as simulated data) refers to data with values or new elements that have been generated artificially (e.g., through statistical modeling or computer simulation).12 Generally, synthetic data are intended to represent the structure, properties, and relationships seen in actual patient data, except that they do not contain any real or specific information about individuals. Synthetic data generation includes the development of digital twins/virtual patients using machine learning to derive simulations from large datasets, as well as the creation of synthetic medical data, such as images of skin diseases under various conditions, or simulating surgical procedures for training clinicians. The use of synthetic data is a potential solution, augmenting limited datasets for rare diseases. However, caution must be exercised to ensure that synthetic data accurately reflects the characteristics of real-world data.To compensate for limited data for rare diseases, one possibility is that public bodies (including regulatory agencies) could aid rare disease research efforts by integrating data from various sources, creating centralized databases. Such databases would provide more comprehensive datasets for more robust research on rare diseases, rather than the smaller, scattered samples relied on now.Approaches that are successful for common diseases may not be applicable to rare diseases, where commercial incentives are limited. Public–private partnerships among academia, industry, patient groups, and regulatory bodies may be necessary to support AI initiatives in the area of rare diseases. Regulatory agencies might need to provide additional support and guidance for rare disease applications, similar to recent guidance on using real-world data.13ConclusionData scarcity is the main challenge in rare diseases, and innovative strategies must be used to overcome this hurdle, potentially achieving more with less. The strategies discussed in this article provide a road map for responsibly integrating AI into the development of rare disease drugs, potentially accelerating the discovery and approval of new therapies for millions of patients with rare diseases worldwide.The FDA is committed to supporting innovations that accelerate drug development to manage and treat rare diseases. Notable FDA rare disease–specific initiatives include the issuance of guidance and the creation of a rare disease innovation hub, a cross-center program designed to foster collaboration and innovation in rare disease drug development.14 In parallel, the FDA also issued the AI/machine learning–specific draft guidance Considerations for the Use of Artificial Intelligence to Support Regulatory Decision-Making for Drug and Biological Products, in January 2025, to provide general recommendations for integrating AI into drug development.15 More focused collaborative efforts will be essential to address the unique scientific, regulatory, and policy issues associated with the integration of AI into the rare disease space in order to expand the number of effective therapeutic options for patients.

IN-BODY EXT-LINKS (9):
http://ai.nejm.org
https://www.fda.gov/media/99546/download
https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/rare-diseases-considerations-development-drugs-and-biological-products
https://ncats.nih.gov/research/our-impact/our-impact-rare-diseases
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK56185/
https://www.fda.gov/science-research/artificial-intelligence-and-medical-products/fda-digital-health-and-artificial-intelligence-glossary-educational-resource
https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/considerations-use-real-world-data-and-real-world-evidence-support-regulatory-decision-making-drug
https://www.fda.gov/industry/medical-products-rare-diseases-and-conditions/fda-rare-disease-innovation-hub
https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/considerations-use-artificial-intelligence-support-regulatory-decision-making-drug-and-biological

REFERENCE LIST (15 refs):
1. 1.U.S. Government. Orphan Drug Act, Pub. L. No. 97–414, 96 Stat. 2049. 1983 (https://www.fda.gov/media/99546/download).
2. 2.SmithCIE, BergmanP, HageyDW. Estimating the number of diseases — the concept of rare, ultra-rare, and hyper-rare. iScience 2022;25:104698. DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2022.104698.35856030 PMC9287598
3. 3.CrookeST. A call to arms against ultra-rare diseases. Nat Biotechnol 2021;39:671–677. DOI: 10.1038/s41587-021-00945-0.34089038
4. 4.U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Rare diseases: considerations for the development of drugs and biological products. December 2023 (https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/rare-diseases-considerations-development-drugs-and-biological-products).
5. 5.National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences. Delivering hope for rare diseases. August 1, 2025 (https://ncats.nih.gov/research/our-impact/our-impact-rare-diseases).
6. 6.HaendelM, VasilevskyN, UnniD,  How many rare diseases are there? Nat Rev Drug Discov 2020;19:77–78. DOI: 10.1038/d41573-019-00180-y.32020066 PMC7771654
7. 7.Regulatory framework for drugs for rare diseases. In: FieldMJ, BoatTF, eds. Rare diseases and orphan products: accelerating research and development. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2010: 73–110 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK56185/).
8. 8.GangwalA, LavecchiaA. AI-driven drug discovery for rare diseases. J Chem Inf Model 2025;65:2214–2231. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.4c01966.39689164
9. 9.PoddarA Leveraging artificial intelligence in drug and biological product development: an FDA and clinical trial transformation initiative workshop report. NEJM AI 2025;2(12). DOI: 10.1056/AIoa2401205.
10. 10.AcostaJN, FalconeGJ, RajpurkarP, TopolEJ. Multimodal biomedical AI. Nat Med 2022;28:1773–1784. DOI: 10.1038/s41591-022-01981-2.36109635
11. 11.GhasemzadehH, HillmanRE, MehtaDD. Toward generalizable machine learning models in speech, language, and hearing sciences: estimating sample size and reducing overfitting. J Speech Lang Hear Res 2024;67:753–781. DOI: 10.1044/2023_jslhr-23-00273.38386017 PMC11005022
12. 12.U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA digital health and artificial intelligence glossary — educational resource. September 26, 2024 (https://www.fda.gov/science-research/artificial-intelligence-and-medical-products/fda-digital-health-and-artificial-intelligence-glossary-educational-resource).
13. 13.U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Considerations for the use of real-world data and real-world evidence to support regulatory decision-making for drug and biological products. August 30, 2023 (https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/considerations-use-real-world-data-and-real-world-evidence-support-regulatory-decision-making-drug).
14. 14.U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA Rare Disease Innovation Hub. October 22, 2025 (https://www.fda.gov/industry/medical-products-rare-diseases-and-conditions/fda-rare-disease-innovation-hub).
15. 15.U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Considerations for the use of artificial intelligence to support regulatory decision-making for drug and biological products. January 6, 2025 (https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/considerations-use-artificial-intelligence-support-regulatory-decision-making-drug-and-biological).
